Preface - copyedits (#179)
mlsa-book/MLSA: book/index.qmd

It then turns to the basic terminology and concepts of survival analysis, followed by more advanced concepts in the more general 'event history analysis'\index{event history analysis} setting, which encompasses competing risks\index{competing risks} and multi-state models\index{multi-state models}.
This Part concludes by unifying terminology between machine learning and survival analysis to define what it means to have different survival prediction problems and a machine learning survival analysis\index{machine learning survival analysis} task\index{task}.

**Part II: Evaluation**<br>
Part II introduces measures for evaluating\index{evaluation} the different types of predictive tasks\index{task} introduced in Part I.
Evaluation is crucial for choosing between models and eventually trusting the predictions from a trained machine learning model.
In each chapter, the measure class is introduced, specific metrics are listed, and commentary is provided on how and when to use the measures.
Recommendations for choosing measures are discussed in @sec-choosing-measures.

> Because this book focuses on the predictive setting, the evaluation measures introduced in Part II are all 'out-of-sample' measures, to be used for evaluating models on new, unseen data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because this book focuses on the predictive setting, the evaluation measures introduced in Part II are all 'out-of-sample' measures, to be used for evaluating models on new, unseen data. Although some of them could also be used for training.
```

This is in contrast to 'in-sample' measures, which evaluate how well a model is fit to data, and are usually preferred for inference tasks.
Readers interested in in-sample measures are directed to @Collett2014 and @dataapplied for discussion on residuals\index{residuals}; @Choodari2012a and @Royston2004 for $R^2$ type measures\index{R-squared}; and @VolinskyRaftery2000; @HURVICH1989, and @Liang2008 for information criterion measures.

**Part III: Models**<br>
Part III is a deep dive into models for solving survival analysis problems.
This begins with 'foundational survival' models that may not be considered 'machine learning' by some; although, as will be shown, with only limited adaptation, these models can be exceptionally powerful.
This Part of the book continues by exploring different classes of machine learning models including random forests, support vector machines, gradient boosting machines, and neural networks.
While this book does not go into full detail about deep learning, the final chapter of this Part provides a foundation that can be complemented by works such as @Goodfellow2016.
Recommendations for choosing models are discussed in @sec-choosing-models.

> For each model class, we first introduce it in a classification or regression setting and then discuss its extension to survival analysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each model class is first introduced in a classification or regression setting, and its extension to survival analysis is then discussed.
```

Partly this is due to the fact that in education, analysis of time-to-event data is not part of the canonical machine learning curriculum, while biostatistics curricula often include survival analysis, but not integrated with machine learning.
In research, survival analysis\index{survival analysis} literature often focuses on univariate, non-parametric techniques or regression models, traditionally due to sector-wide requirements for interpretability and uncertainty quantification (particularly in healthcare domains).
Machine learning\index{machine learning} literature on the other hand focuses on regression and classification which cover the majority of predictive use cases.
In recent years there has been increasing overlap between survival analysis and machine learning, but there appears to still be a substantial gap in the knowledge and skills required to integrate the two fields. 
This book aims to further bridge the gap by introducing the key fundamental concepts of both fields before combining them into _machine learning survival analysis_\index{machine learning survival analysis}.

> The rapid rise of generative artificial intelligence\index{artificial intelligence!generative} (genAI) with tools such as ChatGPT, Gemini, and Claude, may lead readers to question the value of traditional machine learning methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

The final chapter provides an outlook on the future direction of machine learning survival analysis\index{machine learning survival analysis}.

### Reproducibility

This book includes simulations and figures generated in $\Rstats$ and $\Python$; the code for any figures or experiments in this book is freely available at [https://github.com/mlsa-book/MLSA](https://github.com/mlsa-book/MLSA) under an MIT license.

## Acknowledgments

We would like to gratefully acknowledge our colleagues who reviewed the content of this book, including: Lukas Burk, Dr. Cesaire Fouodo, Prof. Dr. Helmut Küchenhoff, Dr. Lea Orsini, Johannes Piller, Prof. Dr. David Rügamer, Prof. Dr. Matthias Schmid, as well as all the anonymous reviewers who took the time to review and provide detailed feedback.

Parts of this book were reviewed and revised using generative AI tools.
The authors fact-checked all responses and rewrote any suggested text to ensure our own voice can be found throughout the book.

> We acknowledge the decades of literature scraped (legally or otherwise) by these tools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Despite its importance in many real-world settings, adaptation of machine learning in survival analysis has lagged behind predictive modeling for classification and regression.
Partly this is due to the fact that analysis of time-to-event data is neither part of the canonical survival analysis nor machine learning curriculum.
Survival analysis\index{survival analysis} literature often focuses on univariate, non-parametric techniques or simple linear models, traditionally due to sector-wide requirements for interpretability and uncertainty quantification (particularly in healthcare domains).
Machine learning\index{machine learning} literature focuses on regression and classification which cover the majority of predictive use cases.
In recent years there has been increasing overlap between survival analysis and machine learning, but there appears to still be a substantial gap in the knowledge and skills required to integrate the two fields. 
This book aims to further bridge the gap by introducing the key fundamental concepts of both fields before combining them into _machine learning survival analysis_\index{machine learning survival analysis}.

> The rapid rise of generative artificial intelligence\index{artificial intelligence!generative} (genAI) with tools such as ChatGPT, Gemini, and Claude, may lead readers to question the value of traditional machine learning methods.

Reviewer: still don't like this paragraph and don't think its necessary. Scope section would close out cleanly without it and transition to overview of the book with the goal to close the gap, mentioned at the end of "scope" would flow naturally

Author: i don't have strong feelings except I've been to conferences where this exact question has been discussed and I think addressing it therefore has value; but I'm not fighting the point, delete if you hate it

It then turns to the basic terminology and concepts of survival analysis, followed by more advanced concepts in the more general 'event history analysis'\index{event history analysis} setting, which encompasses competing risks\index{competing risks} and multi-state models\index{multi-state models}.
This Part concludes by unifying terminology between machine learning and survival analysis to define what it means to have different survival prediction problems and a machine learning survival analysis\index{machine learning survival analysis} task\index{task}.

**Part II: Evaluation**<br>
Part II introduces measures for evaluating\index{evaluation} the different types of predictive task\index{task} introduced in Part I.
Evaluation is crucial for choosing between models and eventually trusting the predictions from a trained machine learning model.
In each chapter, the measure class is introduced, specific metrics are listed, and commentary is provided on how and when to use the measures.
Recommendations for choosing measures are discussed in @sec-choosing-measures.

> Because this book focuses on the predictive setting, the evaluation measures introduced in Part II are all 'out-of-sample' measures, to be used for evaluating models on new, unseen data.

Reviewer: this paragraph is weirdly specific with many references for a preface outline. also not sure if thats helpful/accurate. nll/rcll are used for both and probably one of the best metrics, particularly for distributional regression

Author: I think we discussed at the time. We wanted to say we don't do in-sample and then list alternatives. happy to shorten or remove... And yes agreed it should say Part II and out-of-sample (but can be used in-sample)

Reviewer: I think its fine, just don't think the book overview is the right place. Could go into scope or at the beginning of evaluation, but feels weird in this detail with references in the overview, unlike overviews of other parts

Reviewer: I guess the comment is missplaced here, should be at line 152

Practitioners who are comfortable with machine learning in general but not necessarily with survival analysis, may find this Part of the book most useful for quickly implementing familiar models within the survival analysis domain.

The final chapter provides an outlook on the future direction of machine learning survival analysis\index{machine learning survival analysis}.

### Reproducibility

This book includes simulations and figures generated in $\Rstats$, the code for any figures or experiments in this book is freely available at [https://github.com/mlsa-book/MLSA](https://github.com/mlsa-book/MLSA) under an MIT license.

## Acknowledgments

We would like to gratefully acknowledge our colleagues who reviewed the content of this book, including: Lukas Burk, Dr. Cesaire Fouodo, Prof. Dr. Helmut Küchenhoff, Prof. Dr. Matthias Schmid, as well as all the anonymous reviewers who took the time to review and provide detailed feedback.

Parts of this book were reviewed and revised using generative AI tools.
The authors fact-checked all responses and rewrote any suggested text to ensure our own voice can be found throughout the book.

> We acknowledge the decades of literature scraped (legally or otherwise) by these tools.

Reviewer: not sure about that, would probably drop

Author: which bit? we have used Ai, it's all over this repo, I think we should be honest. iif you meant the last line specifically we can remove

While this book does not go into full detail about deep learning, the final chapter of this Part provides a foundation that can be complemented by works such as @Goodfellow2016.
Recommendations for choosing models are discussed in @sec-choosing-models.

> For each model class, we first introduce it in a classification or regression setting and then discuss its extension to survival analysis.

Author: ```
Each model class is first introduced in a classification or regression setting and then extensions to survival analysis are discussed.
```

I've spent hours removing "we" as we discussed mths ago, please let's not add it back in :(
